docs(icon): add new icon system ADR (#688)
CleverCloud/clever-components: docs/adr/adr-0022-new-icon-system.md

---
kind: '📌 Docs/Architecture Decision Records'
---
# ADR 0022: Implementing a new icon system

🗓️ 2023-XX-XX · ✍️ Robert Tran, Florian Sanders

## The context

Historically, icons were displayed from static assets in our Clever Components.

> Basically, it is SVG files as source of `<img>` tags, whether it is directly coded in the component or via a property, like in the `<cc-button>` component.

Reviewer: switching to present feels weird to me here, maybe we could use present tense for the previous sentence as well? (present tense is simpler to whenever we can, let's use it!)

```javascript
// MyComponent.js
const fooSvg = new URL('assets/foo.svg', import.meta.url).href;

function render () {
  return html`<span class="my-icon"><img src=${fooSvg} alt=""></span>`;
}
```

And from a usage perspective, whenever a new icon is needed, it must be created and added to the assets.

## The problem

While the implementation is quite straightforward, it unfortunately comes with downsides.

### As static assets with no backing icon library

As the number of icons increases, the risk of disparateness increases as well, managing them becoming harder and harder. This solution tends to be not scalable.

> Moreover, the SVG are displayed as is, with no optimization beforehand nor check for unwanted content (hardcoded values for example).

Author: You're totally right and it is my bad, I completely missed that implementation! I'll remove this sentence. :+1:

Thus, color customization is quite restricted and forces us to have a one file per color usage for each icon. Another consequence is making theme implementation more difficult (especially for a dark theme).

### And more

From a technical point, icons are imported with the `new URL('./foo.svg', import.meta.url).href` syntax in our components. Leading us to more complexity in our stacks with a dedicated [Rollup](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@web/rollup-plugin-import-meta-assets) plugin in our components and a dedicated [Babel](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@babel/plugin-syntax-import-meta) plugin in some projects where our components are used.

Same consideration on Vue.js projects where this syntax triggers errors: more details on this topic [here](https://github.com/CleverCloud/clever-components/issues/130).

## The solution

We decided to:
- change how we displayed icons,
- change how the assets were processed,
- add a backing icon library.

This was done with:
- creating an icon component,
- adding a rollup plugin,
- adding a backing icon library.

### The icon component

> We wanted a technical brick helping us with displaying icons. Naturally, it comes as a new (atomic) component, as part of our Clever Components. More precisely as a Web Component built on top of [Lit](https://lit.dev/).

Author: "layer" is perfect!

This `<cc-icon>` component allows us to have a better control on how the icon is displayed through:
- component properties: on size and skeleton mode,
- CSS custom properties: on size (as an override mechanism) and color.

> This two points are made possible because the component renders the SVG content inline. Having a dedicated component also helps to implement more [accessible icons](#accessible-icons).

Author: Ho nice catch, I forgot to change this: agree that it would a nice feature in Storybook.
I'll go for a `(see below)`.

This SVG rendering point brings us to another part of the new icon system: the Rollup plugin.

### The Rollup plugin

We wanted to change the way icons were loaded in components, in order to get rid of the `new URL('./foo.svg', import.meta.url).href` syntax. The simplest and effective way in our case is by importing the icon as an ES object: that's where the plugin comes into play.

Its roles are to:
- parse the icon assets,
- clean and optimize them (with [SVGO](https://github.com/svg/svgo)),
- transform them into ES objects,
- write them in a specific file.

> Those actions are done at build time and at runtime (during development). The generated content can be imported and used by the `<cc-icon>` component through one of its properties. This method also benefits from tree-shaking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those actions are done at build time and at runtime (only in development environment).
The generated content can be imported and used by the `<cc-icon>` component through one of its properties.
This method also benefits from tree-shaking.
```

We did not choose to go this way because:

* There was too much room for mistakes. Developers could add the `role="img"` attribute and forget to add the `aria-label` attribute.
* Relying on the `<cc-icon>` element itself and not the `<svg>` does not work on Safari.

##### Reproducing the img API

We considered using an `alt` prop and attribute to mimic the `<img>` API.

We did not choose to go this way because we want to avoid using existing native attributes like `title` for instance.

##### Using a custom accessible-name attribute

We chose to use a `accessible-name` attribute that should only be used if the icon conveys information.

This simplifies the API for developers because:

* In most cases, icons are decorative so there is nothing to do.
* When the icon is informative, they only have one attribute to add.
* We already use an `accessible-name` attribute on the `<cc-button>`. This means this attribute should be familiar for developers using our components. It is also a well-known concept for many people who have worked on accessibility before.

## Limits and prospects

> Where Remix Icon is a great library, it is currently on [pause](https://github.com/Remix-Design/RemixIcon/issues/232).

Reviewer 2: He seems to be back on stage now: https://github.com/Remix-Design/RemixIcon/issues/232#issuecomment-1017140063

> Where Remix Icon is a great library, it is currently on [pause](https://github.com/Remix-Design/RemixIcon/issues/232).

Reviewer 2: He seems to be back on stage now: https://github.com/Remix-Design/RemixIcon/issues/232#issuecomment-1017140063

Author: Yes! Unfortunately, this message is one year old and there hasn't been much activity since then. :shrug:
I'll slightly update the sentence nevertheless.

As we strictly limited the first version of the new icon system to our use cases, there are some options worth considering for future improvements:

> - add more properties to the component for tweaking the icon rendering: `flip`, `rotation`, `badge`, etc.

Reviewer: (your sentence is ok, just a suggestion)
```suggestion
- add more component properties to tweak the icon rendering: `flip`, `rotation`, `badge`, etc.
```

- implement an icon [provider](https://core.clarity.design/foundation/icons/) to facilitate usage outside the Clever Components scope.

## Resources

### In English

* [a11y support - `<svg>` + `<title>` elements](https://a11ysupport.io/tests/html_svg_inline_with_title)
* [Accessible SVGs: Perfect Patterns For Screen Reader Users by Carie Fisher on Smashing Magazine](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2021/05/accessible-svg-patterns-comparison/)

### In French

> * <a href="https://access42.net/svg-accessible?lang=fr" lang="fr">Comment intégrer du SVG de manière accessible ? - Access42</a>,

Reviewer 2: Why not use the markdown syntax for those links?

Author: I'll ping @florian-sanders-cc for this one. :smile:  
Is it to specify the `lang` HTML attribute?

Reviewer: Yes exactly ! :+1:

  return html`<span class="my-icon"><img src=${fooSvg} alt=""></span>`;
}
```

And from a usage perspective, whenever a new icon is needed, it must be created and added to the assets.

## The problem

While the implementation is quite straightforward, it unfortunately comes with downsides.

### As static assets with no backing icon library

As the number of icons increases, the risk of disparateness increases as well, managing them becomes harder and harder.
This solution does not scale well.

And icon creation and/or picking can be pretty tedious.

### As image tags

When referenced using an `<img>` tag, it is not possible to update a SVG `stroke` and `fill` properties using CSS (more details in [this article about SVG customization](https://css-tricks.com/the-many-ways-to-change-an-svg-fill-on-hover-and-when-to-use-them/)).

Thus, color customization is quite restricted and forces us to have a one file per color usage for each icon. Another consequence is making theme implementation more difficult (especially for a dark theme).

### And more

From a technical point, icons are imported with the `new URL('./foo.svg', import.meta.url).href` syntax in our components.

> This created more complexity in our stacks with a dedicated [Rollup](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@web/rollup-plugin-import-meta-assets) plugin in our components and a dedicated [Babel](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@babel/plugin-syntax-import-meta) plugin in some projects where our components are used.

Reviewer 3: Maybe add a sentence before this one:

```
This is plain standard JavaScript syntax that works in modern browsers but it's still not accepted as is in modern JavaScript toolchains like bundlers.
```

> Same consideration on Vue.js projects where this syntax triggers errors: more details on this topic in [issue #130](https://github.com/CleverCloud/clever-components/issues/130).

Reviewer 3: ```
Same consideration on Vue.js projects and any projects using Vite where this syntax triggers errors: more details on this topic in [issue #130](https://github.com/CleverCloud/clever-components/issues/130).
```

### The icon component

We wanted a technical layer helping us with displaying icons.
Naturally, it comes as a new (atomic) component, as part of our Clever Components.
More precisely as a Web Component built on top of [Lit](https://lit.dev/).

This `<cc-icon>` component allows us to have a better control on how the icon is displayed through:

- component properties: on size and skeleton mode,
- CSS custom properties: on size (as an override mechanism) and color.

These two points are made possible because the component renders the SVG content inline.
Having a dedicated component also helps to implement more accessible icons (see below).

This SVG rendering point brings us to another part of the new icon system: the Rollup plugin.

### The Rollup plugin

We wanted to change the way icons were loaded in components, in order to get rid of the `new URL('./foo.svg', import.meta.url).href` syntax.
The simplest and effective way in our case is by importing the icon as an ES object: that's where the plugin comes into play.

Its roles are to:

- parse the icon assets,
- clean and optimize them (with [SVGO](https://github.com/svg/svgo)),
- transform them into ES objects,

> - write them in a specific file.

Reviewer 3: This list could mention (in the last item or in another one) that the produced file is a valid ESM (or ES module) file.

Those actions are done at build time and at runtime (only in development environment).
The generated content can be imported and used by the `<cc-icon>` component through one of its properties.

> This method also benefits from tree-shaking.

Reviewer 3: Maybe something like that:

```
This method also benefits from tree-shaking because we import icons from ES modules.
```
